W-14927671  Pdk ga branch gr (#464)
mulesoft/docs-gateway: pdk/1.0/modules/ROOT/pages/policies-pdk-integration-tests.adoc

= Writing Integration Tests
ifndef::env-site,env-github[]
include::_attributes.adoc[]
endif::[]
:imagesdir: ../assets/images

> Flex Gateway Policy Development Kit (PDK) provides an automated testing framework to to detect integration regressions in your custom policy.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Flex Gateway Policy Development Kit (PDK) provides an automated testing framework to detect integration regressions in your custom policy.
```

. <<review-service-logs>>.

[[before-you-begin]]
== Before You Begin

Ensure that you have:

* https://www.docker.com/[Installed Docker^]

[[structure]]
== Integration Tests Directory Structure

By default, the `<root-directory>/tests` directory contains the following files:

----
tests
├── common.rs
├── requests.rs
├── common
│   └── logging.yaml
│   └── registration.yaml
└── requests
    └── hello
        └── api.yaml
----

The `/tests` directory contains the integration tests. By default, the folder contains:

* `requests.rs` file: An individual test module and executable.
* `commons.rs` file: A test module that contains functionalities that must be included in every integration test module.

Each test module has a configuration directory. By default, `/test` includes the following folders: 

* `/requests`
* `/common`

Every module contains test functions annotated with the `#[pdk_test]` attribute. Each test function also has a configuration subdirectory. For example, the `requests::hello` test function has the corresponding `requests/hello` directory containing all the `hello` test configuration files.

[[register]]
== Register a Flex Gateway Instance in Local Mode

> To begin using the `test` command to debug your custom policy, you must register a Flex Gateway in Local Mode.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
To begin using the `test` command to debug your custom policy, register a Flex Gateway in Local Mode.
```

> For the `test` command to work, a Flex Gateway `registration.yaml` file must be in the `<root-directory>/tests/common` directory. An easy way to do this is to run the registration command in the directory, or you can move a `registration.yaml` file of a previously registered Flex Gateway to the directory.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
For the `test` command to work, a Flex Gateway `registration.yaml` file must exist in the `<root-directory>/tests/common` directory. Create this file by running the registration command in the directory, or move a `registration.yaml` file of a previously registered Flex Gateway to the directory.
```

The `test` command only supports Flex Gateways running in Local Mode in a Docker Container. To register a Flex Gateway, see xref:gateway::flex-local-reg-run.adoc#docker[]

> IMPORTANT: You only need to run the registration command. Do not run the Docker start command. The `test` command completes this step.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
IMPORTANT: Run only the registration command. Do not run the Docker start command because the `test` command completes this step.
```

> A different registration file must be created on each device testing the policy.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Create a different registration file on each device testing the policy.
```

> The registration file is ignored for storage in remote repositories and is listed in `.gitignore` file located at the root of the project directory.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The registration file is ignored for storage in remote repositories and is listed in the `.gitignore` file located at the root of the project directory.
```

To configure the custom policy:

. Print the policy ID by running the `show-policy-ref-name`:

[source,ssh]
----
make show-policy-ref-name
----

. Copy the result.

. Override `{{project-name}}` in `api.yaml` with your policy ID, for example:
+
[source,yaml]
----
    policies:
    - policyRef:
        name: <custom-policy-id>
----

. Configure the policy's configuration parameters.
+
To find your configuration parameters, see the `gcl.yaml` file.

. Copy and past the `api.yaml` into the resource folders of your other test functions.

[[run-integration-test]]
== Run an Integration Test

To run the integrations tests modules in the `/tests` folder, execute the `test` command:

[source,ssh]
----
make test
----

Run this test as you add additional features to your integration test to ensure proper configuration.

NOTE: The `test` command compiles the policy before running the integration tests.

[[write-an-integration-test]]
== Write an Integration Test

> PDK integration tests contain a composite of services running inside a Docker network. You can register service instances in a `TestComposite` object. Every service has a configuration, hostname, and instance

Reviewer: ```suggestion
PDK integration tests contain a composite of services running inside a Docker network. You can register service instances in a `TestComposite` object. Every service has a configuration, hostname, and instance.
```

> The `pdk-test` crate contains all the functionality for writing integration tests for custom policies in PDK. It is included in the `[dev-dependencies]` section of the `Cargo.toml` file.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The `pdk-test` crate contains all the functionality for writing integration tests for custom policies in PDK and is included in the `[dev-dependencies]` section of the `Cargo.toml` file.
```

[[create-a-test-function]]
=== Create a Test Function

Add a new test module by placing a new test function in an existing test module, for example `/tests/requests.rs`.

> PDK test functions are `async` functions decorated with `#[pdk_test]` attribute:ß

Reviewer: ```suggestion
PDK test functions are `async` functions decorated with the `#[pdk_test]` attribute:
```

[source,rust]
----
use pdk_test::pdk_test;

#[pdk_test]
async fn say_hello() {

}
----

NOTE: Because the body is empty, this test function never fails. Run `make test` to ensure everything is working fine.

[[supported-services]]
=== Supported Services

The PDK test library supports the following services:

[cols="1,1"]
|===
|Service |Description

| `Flex`
| Flex Gateway service instance.

| `httpmock`
| Service binding to the Rust's https://crates.io/crates/httpmock:[httpmock] server.
|===

> The supported services cover the majority of use-cases for integration testing. It is not possible to define different types of service.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The supported services cover the majority of use cases for integration testing. It is not possible to define different types of service.
```

[[httpmock-service]]
=== httpmock Service

> `httpmock` is a mock server that enables you to write request mocks in Rust. You can configure an https://crates.io/crates/httpmock[httpmock^] service by using an `HttpMockConfig` value. It is a best practice to return a `Result` from the test function. The Rust crate https://crates.io/crates/anyhow:[anyhow^] Rust crate enables you to return different default error types.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
`httpmock` is a mock server that enables you to write request mocks in Rust. Configure an https://crates.io/crates/httpmock[httpmock^] service by using an `HttpMockConfig` value. It is a best practice to return a `Result` from the test function. The https://crates.io/crates/anyhow:[anyhow^] Rust crate enables you to return different default error types.
```

async fn say_hello() -> anyhow::Result<()> {

    // Configure HttpMock service
    let backend_config = HttpMockConfig::builder()
        .hostname("backend")
        .port(80) // Port where the service will accept requests
        .build();

    // Register HTTPBin service and start the docker network
    let composite = TestComposite::builder()
        .with_service(backend_config)
        .build()
        .await?;

    // Get the httpmock handle
    let httpmock: HttpMock = composite.service()?;

    // Connect the mock server
    let mock_server = httpmock::MockServer::connect_async(httpmock.socket()).await;

    // Configure the endpoint mocks
    mock_server.mock_async(|when, then| {
        when.path_contains("/hello");
        then.status(202).body("World!");
    }).await;

    let base_url = mock_server.base_url();

    // Hit the endpoint
    let response = reqwest::get(format!("{base_url}/hello")).await?;

    // Assert on response
    assert_eq!(response.status(), 202);
    assert_eq!(response.text().await?, "World!");

    Ok(())
}
----

NOTE: Run `make test` to ensure proper configuration.

[[configure-a-flex-service-instance]]
=== Configure a Flex Service Instance

> Configure a `Flex` service by registering a `FlexConfig` in the `TestComposite`.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Configure a `Flex` service by registering a `FlexConfig` in `TestComposite`.
```

> `Flex` services have the following configurable properties are:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
`Flex` services have the following configurable properties:
```

[cols="1,1"]
|===
|Property |Content

|`version`
|Flex Gateway version to test.

|`hostname`
|Hostname of the `Flex` service. By default, "local-flex".

|`config_mounts`
|A map of local directories where the `Flex` service finds configuration files.

> `POLICY_DIR` and `COMMON_CONFIG_DIR` constants are defined in `common.rs` module when the project is created. +

Reviewer: ```suggestion
`POLICY_DIR` and `COMMON_CONFIG_DIR` constants are defined in the `common.rs` module when the project is created. +
```

|===

To configure a `Flex` service instance, see the following code example:

[source,rust]
----
mod common;
use common::*;

use pdk_test::{pdk_test, TestComposite};
use pdk_test::port::Port;
use pdk_test::services::flex::FlexConfig;

// Directory with the configurations for the `say_hello` test.
const SAY_HELLO_CONFIG_DIR: &str = concat!(env!("CARGO_MANIFEST_DIR"), "/tests/requests/say_hello");

// Port where Flex is waiting for requests
const FLEX_PORT: Port = 8081;

#[pdk_test]
async fn say_hello() -> anyhow::Result<()> {

    // Configure a Flex service
    let flex_config = FlexConfig::builder()
        .version("1.6.1")
        .hostname("local-flex")
        .config_mounts([
            (POLICY_DIR, "policy"),
            (COMMON_CONFIG_DIR, "common"),
            (SAY_HELLO_CONFIG_DIR, "say_hello"),
        ])
        .ports([FLEX_PORT])
        .build();

    let composite = TestComposite::builder()
        .with_service(flex_config)
        .build()
        .await?;
}
----

NOTE: Run `make test` to ensure proper configuration.

[[flex-service-endpoint-requests]]
=== Flex Service Endpoint Requests

> `Flex` service expose endpoints with external base URLs dependant on the port. To access those URLs, the

Reviewer: ```suggestion
`Flex` service exposes endpoints with external base URLs dependent on the port. To access those URLs, the
```

> Flex service instance handle provides `external_url()` method indexed by port, for example:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Flex service instance handle provides the `external_url()` method indexed by port, for example:
```

    let composite = TestComposite::builder()
        .with_service(flex_config)
        .with_service(httpmock_config)
        .build()
        .await?;

    // Get a handle to the Flex service
    let flex: Flex = composite.service()?;

    // Get an external URL to point the Flex service
    let flex_url = flex.external_url(FLEX_PORT).unwrap();

    // Get a handle to the HttpMock service
    let httpmock: HttpMock = composite.service()?;

    // Create a MockServer
    let mock_server = MockServer::connect_async(httpmock.socket()).await;

    // Mock a /hello request
    mock_server.mock_async(|when, then| {
        when.path_contains("/hello");
        then.status(202).body("World!");
    }).await;

    // Perform an actual request
    let response = reqwest::get(format!("{flex_url}/hello")).await?;

    // Assert on the response
    assert_eq!(response.status(), 202);

    Ok(())
}
----

[[review-service-logs]]
== Review Service Logs

After an integration test fails, you can view the service logs to find errors. To improve the debugging experience, there is a dedicated service log in each test folder at `<root-directory>/target/pdk-test/<module-name>/<test>/<service>.log`.

> For the example, the `say_hello` tests has the following service log:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
For the example, the `say_hello` test has the following service log:
```
